The sun is shining, the birds
are chirping. Most of you are
sweating. It's sunscreen misinformation season.
I'm Michelle, chemist and probably the leading
expert on social media sunscreen misinformation at
this point. This time we have some old myths, but
also some brand new myths. Because if you don't
care about truth, you can just make stuff up.
Just pull it out of your energy recharging hole.
Welcome to Critical Thinking Club,
sunscreen edition. Grab a drink,
grab your sunglasses, grab your
tinfoil hat. Let's get into it.
Briski4real: And if I pull up to the
function looking a little blue, how
about you just go ahead and mind your business?
The dermatologist said the only way I'm going
to get rid of this hyperpigmentation
is if I have mineral sunscreen on,
and unfortunately, this is how every single one
I've encountered has been formulated. Okay? So
if I pull up to the function looking
like a gross sister, leave me alone.
M: This myth really annoys me because I mean,
no one should have to suffer looking like this.
Mineral sunscreens do not have some sort
of special property that makes them work
better for hyperpigmentation or anything else.
There are a few reasons that people give
for this idea. The first one is that mineral
sunscreens reflect UV whereas chemical
sunscreens absorb UV and then convert
it to heat. And the idea is that this extra
heat can make pigment worse. This simply is
not true. Mineral sunscreens also mostly
work by absorbing UV and converting it
to heat. And the amount of heat that
they produce is really, really tiny.
I put a bunch of different sunscreens on
my arm and went into the sun and looked
at it through a thermal camera and you
can't see a difference between the two
different types of sunscreen or even
between any of the sunscreens and my
skin. There is a bigger difference in
heat between my elbow and my wrist.
The second myth is that mineral sunscreens protect
more against blue light. They really don't do that
much unless they are tinted sunscreens because
it is the iron oxides giving it the tint that is
absorbing the blue light. Skin is kind of in that
orange range. And if you look at a color wheel,
complementary colors are opposite on the
color wheel. If something looks orange,
that means it is absorbing the
opposite color, which is blue.
But tinted chemical sunscreens protect against
visible light just as well as tinted physical
sunscreens. For example, there's this study
from Brazil. Out of the 41 tinted sunscreens
they tested, 26 of them blocked over 99.9% of the
visible light. That is almost two thirds of them.
And this included both chemical
and physical tinted sunscreens.
They also tested three non-tinted sunscreens and
they found that they did not protect
much against visible light at all.
Another myth is that mineral sunscreens protect
better against UVA because they block all
wavelengths and this isn't true. You do want high
UVA protection because this is a huge trigger for
pigment. This graph shows how well different
ingredients block different wavelengths of UV.
The higher the line, the better it's blocking at
that wavelength. On this graph, UVA goes from here
up to over here. Zinc oxide is this low green line
over here. And you can see it's quite wide across,
but it's quite low, which means you need to put a
lot of zinc oxide in to get high protection. It's
sort of like a low fence. If you have a lot of
zinc oxide, that's what gives that white cast.
Now, chemical sunscreens tend to block
less evenly across a range of wavelengths.
So they're like skinnier fences, but they are a
lot higher. That's why every chemical sunscreen
has a bunch of different ingredients in it. so
that they can sort of cover the whole spectrum.
They're putting the fences next to each other.
And if you look at the highest fences here,
these are all chemical sunscreens. Like avobenzone
is this red one. It is kind of a beast. It's
really big. This big one over here is the new
one from L'Oreal, which is Mexoryl 400 MCE.
Both types of sunscreens can still be low and
high protection. It really depends on what the
labeled SPF is. But in terms of like absolute
limits, mineral sunscreens have more limits.
If you just have mineral and you want
really really high UVA protection,
it ends up looking super super white
and people don't want to wear it.
I published a report with BeautySciComm recently
on a survey that we did about a year and a half
ago. We found that the top reasons people don't
wear sunscreens are largely aesthetic reasons.
Things like they couldn't find a sunscreen with a
comfortable texture. They haven't found one that
looked nice. They couldn't find one without
icing. Even though a lot of people know they
should be wearing sunscreen, they just will
not wear sunscreen until they find one that
they like aesthetically. This is why I say you
need to find a sunscreen that you enjoy applying
a lot of regularly. Because if you don't, then you
probably aren't going to wear it. For some people,
they will genuinely enjoy mineral sunscreens
more. But for the vast majority of people,
we prefer chemical sunscreens. And this is why
all these myths about the fake benefits of mineral
sunscreens are so harmful. When people think
they're the only option, they just end up not
wearing sunscreen at all. If it's not even safe
for a coral reef, what makes you think that it's
safe for your skin? Personally, I don't understand
why every summer we slather ourselves in sunscreen
when it's our largest organ. If something isn't
good for coral, that doesn't mean that it's
also not good for humans. Like, we are different
species. We react to different things. Like dogs,
they do not react well to chocolate. Humans are
fine with it. With cows, they eat tons of grass.
and humans should not be eating grass. It's really
bad for your stomach. There's also this skin being
the largest organ thing. Just because it's the
largest organ doesn't mean that putting things on
it is somehow worse. Skin has largely evolved to
be a barrier. It is mostly keeping things out. The
pineal gland is probably our smallest organ. And I
guarantee you that rubbing sunscreen onto that is
going to be way worse. I mean, even rubbing water
on it is going to be way worse because of things
like bacteria. In Thailand, you can't even go in
the water above your ankles because the sunscreen
is bleaching and damaging the coral reefs. This
is what a healthy coral reef looks like. And
this is what it looks like when it's exposed to
sunscreen. Sunscreens bleaching coral reefs is a
massive myth that started with like one bad paper.
There's actually been research on how sunscreens
impact coral for a really long time before this
paper that came out in October 2015. and it was
always really high amounts. But this study was
essentially just marketed really, really well. So
this was in October 2015. This came from someone
called Craig Downs. And basically they measured
how much oxybenzone was needed to hurt coral. And
then they also measured how much was actually in
the environment near reefs. Essentially
according to their data, the levels that
they found near the reefs were higher than the
levels that they found were needed to hurt coral.
Now, this kind of seems reasonable on the face of
it, but once you look deeper
into it, it gets kind of sus.
First off, this study was all over the media
right after they published it. Like, all of
these headlines are from October 20th or 21st.
And that's because they sent out a press release
before the study was published. This is something
called "science by press release". Essentially,
this is a really exciting topic. Reporters want
to be the first to report on it and get those
clickbait titles. So these journalists didn't wait
for other coral scientists to actually read the
study critically and look for problems with it
before they put out their stories and got this
idea into everyone's heads. And it turns out
there were tons of problems with this study.
In 2022, the National Academies did a sunscreen
study. They had a whole bunch of the top coral
researchers go through all the data on this
and work out what's going on. And it turns out
both types of data from this study were massive
outliers. They just did not agree with the rest
of the data. First, the levels of oxybenzone in
the environment. These were based on measurements
that sometimes were just a single sample that was
half a cup of water. Like literally this much.
This study concluded that there were lots of
data gaps before they could make any sort of
real recommendations. But big picture, sunscreen
is just really far down on the list of things
that are causing coral bleaching. This is what
a lot of the top coral scientists were saying
when the original study came out. You can
see more on that in my video on reef safe
sunscreen. If you look at the Great Barrier
Reef, the bit where there's the most bleaching
is near the top. That is not where tourists
go. Tourists are mostly in the green area,
which is where there's the least bleaching.
So it doesn't make sense if sunscreen was
actually causing this. The obvious answer is
climate change. It's always climate change.
So why did this study cause so many changes in
laws? Well, politicians aren't always making
decisions based on good science. A lot of the
time, it is just to get votes. People really
like coral and it is so much easier just to
ban a couple sunscreen ingredients instead
of actually taking proper action on climate
change. It is like a smokescreen for inaction.
Now in terms of chemical versus mineral,
they actually completely overlap in toxicity
according to that National Academies
study. This diagram is from it. Each
of these dots is a data point from a study.
And lower means more toxic. And you can see
zinc oxide is actually pretty bad. If
you use unrealistic amounts on coral,
it can actually be more toxic than oxybenzone
and octinoxate, which are the two that have
been really pushed as "not reef safe". Unless
you are swimming right next to the coral,
it is just really unlikely that your sunscreen
choice is going to make much of a difference.
jasonpraxis: Liver King, Goatis and all of these
advanced thinkers of our race do not use sunscreen
because they understand that sunscreen does
exactly what it says that it prevents. People say,
"Ah, wear sunscreen and you'll be protected."
Against what? Against the sun? Literally the
primary source of energy on this planet
for every single ecosystem alive. The
very thing that's keeping you alive, they're
saying, "Block it out. Block out the divine
connection that you have with the sun." How
inane and asinine of an argument is that?
M: I honestly can't work out if this account
is a parody or not because Liver King,
he is this influencer who was really
into eating raw organ meat, but he's
never really been held up to be like one of the
advanced thinkers of our race by his followers,
even before all the stuff came out about how he
was just on steroids the whole time, allegedly.
But then I scrolled through this guy's profile
and there's a video of him buying all this raw
milk. And to me that just seems like a
bit too much commitment like financially
to this whole parody. But then he also
posted a video about how eating with
utensils causes IBS because it means you
don't have that same connection with your
food. And then the next day he posted
himself eating ice cream with a spoon.
And then there's also this video where he
pronounces CeraVe and Japosition correctly.
jasonpraxis: I need CeraVe. I need SPF 50.
I need SPF 30. What a huge juxtaposition
between natural and artificial.
Next time you put on sunscreen,
cream for your face, retinol.
Consider the juxtaposition.
M: Like and subscribe to support my detective
work. And he's also got an orchid in the
background. That is not easy to grow in the UK.
Like that requires brains and talent. I guess it's
also possible that I am just unbelievably
bad with plants. And also in this video,
his window blind is down. It is literally blocking
out the divine connection that he should have to
the sun. And I thought maybe this was a really
funny subtle touch, except the blind is down for
nearly all of his other videos in this position.
So maybe he is just new to thinking. I don't know.
Maybe it's more obvious to some of you that
he's serious or not. Maybe I want him to be
joking because it would just be too depressing
otherwise. I guess on the bright side, it is nice
to have East Asian representation in this like
galaxy brained wellness space. The whole model
minority thing where Asians are meant to be really
good at science and smart is a harmful stereotype.
It must be really nice and spacious in his
brain. Just so much room for activities.
doctormyro: Why are people so scared of
chemical sunscreens? Let me tell you.
M: This is Dr. Myro. He is an anesthesiologist.
He posts like three videos a day or something
on all sorts of topics. So unsurprisingly, his
video on sunscreens has a lot of myths in it.
doctormyro: In 2019, they took 24 healthy
volunteers and they had them apply chemical
sunscreen four times per day for four days.
They then tested their blood and they found
out that these chemicals, the sunscreen
chemicals actually got into their blood
at the level so high the FDA said, "hm,
we have to study this." It gets worse.
M: So note all this spooky music. It's
really building this atmosphere. Now,
the first part is correct. This study is cited
by a lot of people, including a lot of medical
doctors and dermatologists, as one of the reasons
they're scared of chemical sunscreens. But the
problem is this study is taken so out of
context. It's a great example of how easy
it is to misinterpret a scientific study if you
don't have the right background. There is just a
lot of assumed knowledge that is not included in
the paper that you need to really interpret it.
In my experience, one of the biggest sources of
sunscreen myths is that people hear sunscreen and
they immediately think the right experts have to
be dermatologists. My friend Jen of the Eco Well
made this excellent chart on who's the right
expert for different beauty topics. For this
one on safety, it's not dermatologists. The right
experts are actually toxicologists. Specifically,
it is safety assessors like Mo Skin Lab,
who I've had on my channel before. This was
a really famous study. It was done by the FDA
and it's been 7 years since it was published.
Other regulators have seen it and all of the
chemical sunscreens that are commonly used
in the US have been reassessed and reallowed in
Europe. Sunscreens are one of the most strictly
regulated products that we put on our skin. This
sort of study does not just slip under the radar.
So clearly there is more to this story. But first
I guess let's hear how he thinks it gets worse.
doctormyro: In another study, scientists found
that after a single application, the chemicals
in sunscreen are found in the blood of every
single volunteer they tested. That's after a
single application of sunscreen, it's now in your
blood. And for ingredients like homosalate and
oxybenzone, those were detected 21 days after
the last application in half the volunteers.
That's right. These chemicals are in your blood
3 weeks after the last application. So what?
M: Again, there's all this scary music, and he
keeps on going on about how it's in your blood.
It's in your blood. Every single volunteer. But
the thing is, detecting something doesn't mean
it's actually doing something. It has to be at
a high enough level to interact with something
in your body to cause a harmful effect. Like,
there are a lot of things that have to happen.
For example, we have a whole bunch
of uranium atoms in our bodies,
and that is completely fine because there's
really not that many of them. So finding
these things at really low levels, it's
really just telling us that analytical
chemists are really good at their jobs
now. Okay, let's hear his reasoning.
doctormyro: Well, in animal studies, they found
these chemicals to disrupt your hormones like
estrogen, testosterone, the thyroid. So while
the FDA is studying these effects in humans,
I'm personally sticking to mineral sunscreen.
M: It's actually been known since the
90s that sunscreens absorb into blood.
It just wasn't officially recognized by
the FDA until they did these recent 2019
and 2020 studies. This is because the FDA
has very specific types of studies that
they require to like officially evaluate
sunscreens and other drugs. So this is
more about the state of the regulations
rather than the state of the science.
Toxicologists everywhere else have been taking
blood absorption into account when they've been
assessing the safety of sunscreens, working out
the safety limits. Plus, they also look at a lot
more studies, too. The EU has reassessed the
safety of all the common chemical sunscreens
used in the US in like the last 5 years. I've
talked about their assessments in a different
video. These animal studies are actually the ones
that they use to set the limits for humans. And
the whole purpose of these studies is to find
the line where there is some sort of effect
happening. So these studies are designed to
find effects. That is a very normal result
of the study. It doesn't mean that there is also
an effect in humans at the amounts that we use.
So in the safety assessment based on the animal
data they work out an amount that would cause a
very small not very concerning effect in humans
who are using the sunscreen every day and then
the limit they set is over 100 times lower than
that. There is just a massive safety buffer. For
example, oxybenzone's new EU limit is 2.2%.
That means that in the safety assessment,
they worked out that even if you use
sunscreen all over your body every day,
it could have 220% oxybenzone and you
should still not have even a very small,
not very concerning change in your body.
Again, these safety buffers are massive.
I have another video where I go through
the EU safety assessments in more detail.
doctormyro: Sure, maybe you
get a bit of the white glow,
but there is no meaningful absorption
in your body. There's no concerns
about hormone disruption. They are for
sure safe for you and the coral reef.
M: I don't think he'd be dismissing this
like "bit of white glow" if he wasn't very
light-skinned himself. The statement "for
sure safe for you", that just isn't true
for anything. Everything has a toxic dose,
including like water and oxygen. Titanium
dioxide and zinc oxide go through the same
safety assessments as chemical sunscreens do.
And there are tons of downsides of mineral
sunscreens, and these can lead to health
risks because they aren't protecting as well.
First off, they have a lot of stability problems
because minerals are dense. We also saw the
white cast and the heaviness. That means that
people tend to apply less than they should
to get good protection. This is why a lot
of mineral sunscreens contain SPF boosters.
These are basically like chemical sunscreens
with very small modifications, so they don't
need to be listed as chemical sunscreens and
a lot of people don't know they exist. But they
pretty much work the same as chemical sunscreens
and they have similar properties, including in
terms of safety. So if mineral sunscreens were
so great and didn't need chemical sunscreens
to help them out, they wouldn't be hiding them.
Again, this is the sort of video that makes
people think they have to use mineral sunscreens
and then they end up not using any sunscreen
at all, even though they really should be.
I wanted to talk a bit about my approach
to dealing with videos like this where it
is really harmful misinformation coming from
someone like a medical doctor, someone that
people who trust science will listen to. They
have authority bias. Because sometimes I get
criticisms about how I'm really harsh to people
who just made one little mistake. And I think
it's because people don't see all the stuff that
happens before I film a debunk of someone's video.
First, I consider how the creator
is probably going to respond and
how far the video has already
spread. I try to give people the
benefit of the doubt if they seem
like they are open to correction.
My professional background is in education. I'm
kind of like obsessed with teaching and explaining
science. I used to be head of chemistry at a big
tutoring college. I was writing the textbooks for
all the teachers and tutors to teach from.
And a lot of that job involved really trying
to untangle how students got the science wrong
and how best to help them stop being wrong. And
a lot of this is about like reading where they're
coming from, whether they're coming in good faith
or bad faith. So if I come across a post and
it's someone who seems to have put in effort,
but they made an honest mistake, because
everyone is human and does that from time
to time ,and I think they might actually do the
right thing and correct themselves. Usually,
I will just leave a polite comment correcting
them. Other people coming across the video
before it's corrected or taken down will also
see it. So here are a couple I've left recently.
Sometimes I'll stitch it if I think it's a common
misconception or there's some interesting signs to
talk about and I will be really nice and polite to
that person. If they seem resistant to correction,
they're doubling down, like if people have
already tried correcting them and they are
just ignoring it or being really rude in response,
or if they have a massive platform and they really
should have better processes in place to reduce
spreading misinformation, I will be a bit meaner.
Now, Dr. Myro, he has 6 million followers.
He's posting three videos a day on a broad
range of topics. That requires a lot
of effort to keep that accurate. He
doesn't seem to practice medicine
anymore, so maybe he has more time.
I don't know how much time his supplement
company takes. When I saw it, this video was
already going viral on Instagram. I think it
had close to or over a million views. He also
posted it to TikTok and YouTube shorts. And the
comments were full of people who believed this.
So I started having a conversation with him
about it. I summed up all my arguments there.
And his response was, he loved my content, which I
doubt he's ever seen. He didn't want "questionable
things on and floating in my body for weeks". and
also better alternatives are widely available.
So we had a bit of a conversation and he just
wasn't understanding half of what I said. I
also mentioned that this sort of clean beauty
argument was the same as the argument from old
school antivaxxers on the MMR vaccine about how
it contained all these questionable ingredients.
This was actually like my superhero slash
supervillain origin story. Way back around 2010,
I was following blogs like Science-Based Medicine.
I realized a lot of the clean beauty arguments and
the antivax arguments actually over overlapped
and no one was debunking the clean beauty stuff.
And I felt like this was a massive problem
because people usually come across clean
beauty maybe a decade before they have kids. So
if they're too scared to put aluminium on their
armpits like a really small amount, they're also
going to be scared of injecting their tiny baby
with a really really minuscule amount because
they don't understand dose. That is the Lab
Muffin origin story. I was trying to pre-bunk
this stuff before pre-bunking was a thing.
Anyway, you can see some of the downsides to
this sort of approach here. It is really hard to
explain topics through text like this and it takes
a lot of time with not very much impact. A lot of
people will watch the video without even looking
at the comments. Over the two days, my comment got
220 likes. His video just on Instagram had gotten
maybe half a million views over the same time.
Also, the number of times I've typed out a really
long comment and then I'm looking something up and
then I come back and Instagram has refreshed and
I've lost my comment. Basically, if a person isn't
getting it after a couple comments, I usually
film a proper debunk or just, you know, walk away.
I posted my video, he followed me for
whatever reason, and then he commented
and his comment is just repeating the same
points again. Even though it is a safe dose,
I feel like I don't want it in my body,
which is fine. We are all allowed to make
choices that are based on feelings and
not science. But he says it's also his
"professional recommendation". He is putting
the weight of his medical expertise behind it.
I responded to him addressing his points.
We don't just have a different opinion on
the interpretation of the studies. This
is not something where we can agree to
disagree. He is not a toxicologist. He is
disagreeing with people who are infinitely
more qualified than him on this topic.
It's like if I had a really weird take
on intubation and I was agreeing to disagree
with him and all the other anaesthesiologists
while also saying a whole bunch of stuff that
was really basic and wrong about incubation.
He also kept going on about like
"industry science" like a Big
pHARMa sort of conspiracy theory which
is just so silly for this. The EU safety
assessments are super transparent. You
can follow through all of their working.
He also talked about aspartame being bad for
you, which all of the food science people have
debunked. And it's another example where switching
to the alternative can actually be harmful.
And I feel very strongly about this
last bit. "As a medical doctor,
you shouldn't be guided by feelings over
evidence, especially when you're posting on
a public platform and superpowering any of your
non-evidence-based advice with authority bias."
I feel like this applies to any scientific
expert creator. It is irresponsible to not
check what the most relevant experts think
about a topic before you post. People trust
experts. My reply was so long I had to break it
up into two comments, but I was smart enough to
draft it in a different app so I didn't like lose
everything. And so we get line breaks this time.
And his response: "it has become apparent that
this is just disintegrating into emotional
arguing and bringing people down. I see you do
a fair amount of it on this channel, especially
other doctors. It has become fashionable these
days to attack healthcare professionals. Anyway,
I don't really participate in personal attacks.
It's just not how I like to treat people and
this is not why I am here. I wish you well and
I hope you can find it within yourself to see
that there is more than one opinion that's valid
here. But if not, it is what it is. Take care."
It's just so ridiculous to be calling someone
emotional when you're bringing like no good
arguments. I think some people who saw this
ended up commenting angrily on his video
because he did delete it off Instagram and he
unfollowed me. Oh no. But then he didn't delete
it off TikTok or YouTube shorts. So again,
I do not think he did this in good faith.
As of now on YouTube, his video has 2.6
million views. Mine has 57.5K on TikTok,
his one has 1.9 million views. Mine
has 37,000. If we combine that,
his video has had 45 times more views
than mine, and he posts seven times
more videos than I do. And it's not
like I successfully refuted it either.
So I think Brandolini's law is actually a
massive underestimate. It is just so much
easier and faster to grow a platform
if you don't care about accuracy,
if you post anything that's exciting, that's
sensational, that will get views. And it is
honestly just really depressing to think about.
I just need to not think about the numbers.
Maybe to cheer ourselves up, we should watch that
primal Asian dude's two brain cells struggling.
jasonpraxis: Utensils are among the worst
inventions in human history. When you eat
with your hands, your hands have nerve endings
that connect to your brain. When you switch to
using a fork, a third party, which is completely
redundant, you no longer have that process.
jasonpraxis: Ice cream is healthier than salad.
Substantially so. It's not
even close. Do you understand?
adeadamsonmd: Sunscreen does not prevent skin
cancer in black people because sun exposure
is not associated with skin cancer
in black people. It's that simple.
M: This is Dr. Ade Adamson and I got
tagged in by so many people to fact
check this which was pretty funny to me
because for this topic he is one of the
top experts who was one of the speakers at
my sunscreen e- summit that I held with Jen
of the Eco Well back in 2022. So this video
is actually debunking a common misconception.
adeadamsonmd: There have been
numerous studies looking at
the relationship between sun exposure
and skin cancers across various races,
ethnicities. None of them have reliably
shown an association between sun and skin
cancer in black people. So any dermatologist,
aesthetician or skin influencer saying that
black people need sunscreen for cancer
prevention is not telling you the truth.
M: He is obviously based in the US and I am in
Australia and it's just so interesting to me
the contrast between our official sun protection
recommendations from US people. I almost always
hear that you need to wear sunscreen everyday.
Everyone needs to do this, even black people.
I've even seen some Australians who have started
saying this because there are just so many more
US people online. I'm a skin cancer researcher
and dermatologists in the United States and I've
written extensively about this. I've published
a seminal article summarizing the data in this
space and quite frankly I'm probably among
the most knowledgeable on the planet about
this very narrow area of science. Even if you
step back and use common sense, if the sun was
such a powerful risk factor causing skin cancer
in black people, wouldn't there be epidemics of
skin cancer in areas of high sun in a lot of black
people such as the Caribbean or subsaharan Africa?
M: There is a caveat here that the
data isn't that extensive. Now,
there are still good reasons for black people to
wear sunscreen. to prevent sunburn, to prevent
premature aging caused by UV, and especially
to prevent uneven pigment. Uneven pigment is a
massive issue if your skin loves pumping out
pigment. The smallest thing can trigger it,
and sun is not a small thing. It is a
massive thing. Uneven pigment is the main
way that pigment competent skin types age. It
is the equivalent of wrinkles for white skin.
But for skin cancer, the main risk factor is if
you are getting more UV than your skin evolved
for. This is why Australia is the skin cancer
capital of the world. It isn't actually because
of the ozone layer that has mostly recovered now
and the whole doesn't actually reach Australia. It
is just white people living where white people did
not evolve. And when I'm talking about evolution,
I'm talking about both melanin, how much
melanin your skin naturally has, like tans,
they don't block out much UV at all, so
they don't really help. Also, mechanisms
for limiting any UV damage once that UV gets
in and stopping that from turning into cancer.
Again, I am in Australia and our sun
protection/exposure guidelines are
very evidence-based. They were last updated in
2023 and they released a 44-page document which
lays out all their reasoning. It is
a collaboration between a bunch of
experts from different perspectives. We have
dermatologists and skin cancer of course,
but we also have our main um general cancer
charity. We also have bone health groups
and multiple sclerosis. And their latest
recommendation is based on skin tone. I
have summarized it in this diagram from my book,
this pretty hardcover book, The Science of Beauty.
Important note here, this recommendation doesn't
take into account if you care about how your
skin looks. This is all just about straight up
health. So if you want to prevent uneven pigment,
white skin actually has a lower risk for that.
So this is like for the parts of your body where
you don't really care as much about the
look of, at least for darker skin tones.
This is the less pretty version from the
guidelines. It says routine sunscreen
application is not needed because of the
low risk of harm from sun exposure. Here
is their reasoning. They refer to the evidence
on darker skin tones and risk of skin cancer.
adeadamsonmd: And before somebody brings up Bob
Marley, who did die from melanoma - it was on
his toe. And when was the last time you
got sunburn down there, so just stop it.
M: Bob Marley is one of the points that
people bring up a lot when they're saying
black people need to wear sunscreen to
prevent skin cancer. But the type of
melanoma that he had was acral melanoma. This
is a specific subtype of melanoma that isn't
linked to sun exposure even in white people.
So sunscreen just wouldn't have helped here.
I've seen people make the argument that black
people should still wear sunscreen just in
case for that teeny tiny potential decrease
in skin cancer risk because skin cancer in
black people does tend to be caught later and
it has worse outcomes. But I don't think this
is a great argument. The cost benefit ratio is
just really bad here. Like black people would
have to pay a lot more in time and money for
a much much lower benefit than white people.
And the reasons for this later detection and
worse outcomes, these are systemic social issues,
socioeconomic inequalities, lower healthcare
access, that kind of thing. So this extra like
sunscreen cost, it just makes it worse. And if I
was super cynical, which I am, I would say this
is a very US cultural thing where they like to
pretend that individual choices are going to be
the solution for systemic problems. I talked about
this in my Yvonne Burkart video, which was also
on sunscreen misinformation. You can't personal
responsibility your way out of systemic problems.
It is essentially the same fundamental issue as
for reef safe sunscreen. This whole idea that all
you have to do to solve climate change is to
choose a different sunscreen. You don't need
like the government to do things. If there was an
individual action type thing that would help with
this, I would say it is to educate people on what
skin cancer in black skin looks like so they know
what to look for and to go see a doctor if they
see like a big red honking flag. Saying "just
wear more sunscreen" - arguably, I would say
this could make the problem a lot worse because
it would make people think you only need to check
places that get sun exposure. But a huge portion
of skin cancers in black skin are in places that
don't get sun exposure, unlike in white skin.
j9naturally: Here's why most sunscreens will
age you more quickly. And that's because most
of them are chemically based. So some of
the chemicals to look out for, octinoxate,
avobenzone, oxybenzone. These chemicals
will react with that UV light coming in
and now that's going to form reactive oxygen
species, ROS's. These are free radicals. We
know that free radicals of course are going to
age our skin with photoaging much more quickly.
M: First of all, the Nambour trial, which is one
of the big studies that found that using sunscreen
does prevent photoaging, it actually used these
two specific ingredients that are here on screen.
The other really ridiculous thing about this is
that mineral sunscreens are actually way more
notorious for producing free radicals when
they're under UV. This is something called
photocatalysis. Titanium dioxide in particular is
really famous for doing this. For all sunscreens,
it doesn't really matter because this free
radical thing is happening in the top dead
layers. The sunscreens don't go very far down.
They don't have a high enough concentration in the
living layers for this to have a big effect. But
on the other hand, what does get lower down and
cause free radicals is UV itself. It can penetrate
far deeper and that is how we get photoaging.
j9naturally: So my tip here is to get some natural
sunlight exposure. That's actually going to help
to build your collagen. There's a right way
to do it. And I have the tips in my new book,
The Lost Medicine. So check it out. So that's
really important that we're actually building
a little bit of a suntan, helping to get more
melanin, which of course is a very powerful
antioxidant, great for anti-aging.
Follow for more natural health tips.
M: What even is this? Like, she
said photo aging before. Literally,
that just means light causing aging. It is the sun
itself and then she's telling you to get more sun.
Has she not seen a lot of like old tan people
before? Melanin is a great natural sunscreen,
but the amount you need is a lot more than what
lighter skin people get after they tan. If your
skin is naturally darker, then it does help. That
is the main reason why there's this whole thing
where black people they tend to age with pigment
rather than with wrinkles. The average age where
black people get wrinkles is like 10 plus years
after white people do. But like none of this means
that going into the sun is actually anti-aging.
UV damages collagen. It increases enzymes in
your skin that specifically break collagen
down. Like where is she getting this from?
If she thinks the UV is coming in and
reacting with the chemical sunscreens
to cause free radicals, why does she not think
this also happens to other substances in your
skin and much deeper in your skin? Here
is a video from Dr. Sarah Gee. She is a
dermatologist in Texas. And you can see the
big difference between the sun exposed arms
and the protected legs. Like all those
wrinkles there are from collagen loss
and also elastin increase. Like that
is aging. The melanin is not helping.
Here is a photo from a paper where a
woman used sunscreen on her face but
not her neck. She is 92 years old and yeah,
wrinkles and melanin. They actually go hand
in hand. There are also a bunch of studies
showing sunscreen reduces aging as well. But
you don't even need science for this. There
are just so many clear real life examples.
I should also say this person, she is
Dr. Janine Bowring. She is a naturopathic
doctor and the training they get is
not really based on rigorous science.
And this is a good example of this. People
got really mad when I said this last time,
but unfortunately maybe some naturopaths are
science-based, but their training really is not.
hubermanlab: A few dermatologists are
re-evaluating the issue of sunlight on
the human body. And the leader of that is um
is a character called Richard Weller um from
Edinburgh. And he's going back over all the data
and Richard's coming out and saying, you know,
um all cause mortality is lower in
people that get a lot of sunlight.
And his argument is that the only
thing you got to avoid is sunburn.
M: This is a clip from the Huberman podcast
that he then posted on Instagram. The guest
he has is Dr. Glen Jeffery and
what he says is technically true,
but there are a ton of caveats, and what
is in his caption needs even more caveats.
First off, I think it's kind of funny
that this is being framed as like only a
few dermatologists who are just starting to
do this. Again, the Australian guidelines,
the official ones, they are very evidence-based
and they've talked about balancing the benefits
and risks of sun exposure for over
a decade. Like these guidelines,
they talk about the benefits. That is why
they recommend not just completely blocking
off the sun. And the Australian College of
Dermatologists, their logo is right here.
They officially endorsed these. I wrote a
blog post about the old guidelines back in
2016. I also did a video on this back in
2018. And it's not just about vitamin D.
There's more evidence now, but there was enough
evidence more than 10 years ago for the skin
cancer capital of the world, Australia, to have
guidelines that encourage some sun exposure.
But the problem is where the balance is. Most
people watching Huberman are probably in the US.
They're probably seeing "get a lot of sunlight
- that means I need a lot more sun exposure."
But most people in the US are
probably getting way more sun
exposure than they should for most of
the year and then maybe less than they
should in the middle of winter. And I
think this also applies to Huberman.
The best way to work this out is UV index. This
tells you how strong the UV is. 1 minute in summer
can be more UV than 30 minutes in winter. That
is why the Australian guidelines are based on
UV index. Basically, it is the same "the dose
makes the poison" thing. The more UV you have,
the more chance you have of that UV
coming in and munting some DNA and
that eventually turning into cancer.
This is the next part of the podcast.
AH: High levels of skin cancer in Australia
GJ: in the Caucasian population
AH: But maybe they're getting too much
sun exposure too fast. The UV
index is very high down there.
GJ: Yeah exactly
AH: I will say you can I mean you got
GJ: You feel it, yeah yeah
AH: You feel it quote unquote.
M: Okay, this is the same thing that he did in
his skin health episode last time. He mentioned
UV index, but then he didn't really link it to
looking it up for his location and seeing how
it compares to Australia. I think he also maybe
doesn't know the recommendation is at UV index
3. Like that is where the line is. It is not
very high where you need to protect your skin.
Glen Jeffery and Richard Weller are in
the UK. That is the two green lines.
Not sure if Huberman has moved to LA now,
but the two blue lines are California,
Los Angeles, and San Francisco. And
then for Australia, that is the red
and orange lines. His situation is so
much more like the Australian situation.
With the UK, white skin evolved there. People
aren't getting large amounts of UV just going
to and from work. For most people, their
main exposure to cancer-causing amounts of
sunlight is when they are roasting on a beach
for a couple of weeks in the middle of summer.
So the advice to just avoid sunburn that
makes a lot more sense in that context.
Although again let us look at my favorite
report. This report is just really underrated.
"Suberythemal exposures to UV radiation
are associated with increased risk of skin
cancer." Suberythemal means it isn't causing your
skin to turn pink. That is like the first step
towards sunburn. Yes, the evidence is stronger
for sunburn causing increased skin cancer.
But "there is evidence from laboratory
studies that suberythemal exposures can
lead to typical UV induced DNA mutations.
And while the skin has effective DNA repair
mechanisms, some mutations can persist
ultimately leading to skin cancer."
The laboratory studies are where they shone
UV onto skin and then they looked at the DNA.
This is what the Nambour trial showed - that
was in Brisbane where wearing sunscreen daily
instead of just when people felt like they
needed it, just to the beach, for example,
that reduced skin cancers. And there's also
a newer Australia study that found that moles
have decreased and this is likely because of
better sun protection. Moles are linked to
melanoma. And for this mole count drop, they
only needed an 11% decrease in UV exposure.
The UV index guideline just makes so much
sense. There's none of this like handwavy
low and high stuff because when you
need to start protecting your skin
is actually much lower than people
expect. And the UV in winter is also
much lower than people expect as well. Like
it doesn't correlate with how bright it is.
And these guidelines aren't just in
Australia. This is on the EPA website
from the US. You only not need protection at
two or below. Like the general recommendation
is that you do need protection before you get
to very high UV index. He also says this bit.
AH: I think we've been fed um a story that
you know excessive sunlight leads to skin
cancer. And the data on all reduced
all-cause mortality um in people that
get a lot of sunlight. I I saw a study
out of Sweden looks very very solid.
M: It's kind of both. Like these things do not
contradict each other. Again, the UV index based
guidelines, they balance both the benefits and
the risks. I also think it's kind of funny how
this guest, Dr. Glen Jeffery, his research is
mostly on eyesight and mitochondria and red light,
but then Huberman takes this clip where he's
talking about a pretty tangential topic and
decides it's like a highlight, like he's only
posted two clips from this interview. And then
his caption for this post is not actually
mentioned in the podcast at all. It is
mostly stuff from his skin health episodes that I
already debunked in my 2-hour video, like all this
physical barrier stuff. This was not mentioned
at all in his interview with Glen Jeffery.
Also, this bit: "people will argue that
chemical based sunscreens can be okay,
but after having spoken to many dermatologists,
including derm ONCOLOGISTS, all caps, and
endocrinologists, it's clear that it's
best to avoid the chemical based sunscreens. The
mineral-based ones are not inferior in any way."
I did have a back and forth with him when
he posted his Dr. Teo Soleymani thing. He
is the derm ONCOLOGIST all caps. So maybe I am
"people". The proper experts for sunscreen safety,
the ones who actually assess this kind of
thing every day - these are toxicologists
and safety assessors like Mo Skin Lab
who is in my Huberman debunk. Like when
was the last time a medical doctor had
to treat someone for a problem that was
definitely caused by chemical sunscreen?
It's just not relevant to their jobs.
The derm ONCOLOGIST Dr Teo Soleymani -
he also recently had a viral 2.2 million
view TikTok. On the Huberman episode, he
said a lot of really bizarre stuff about
sunscreen and skincare products which
I went through in that debunk. He also
sells a supplement called sun powder
that's meant to reduce sun damage.
This video was actually posted on the
supplement account. Let's have a look.
drinksunpowder: Skin cancer surgeon
ranks popular sunscreens. Banana boat
sports spray. 2.7 out of 10. If you have
nothing at all and you have to use it,
definitely some protection is better than
not. But long term, I don't like this product.
M: I agree with him on sprays. They are kind of
garbage. The problem is that they come out in
tiny droplets and most of those do not land
on your skin, especially if you're spraying
from far away. This is definitely the case with
face sunscreens because you are spraying it from
far away like that. I did a bunch of tests and
with how the average person is applying them,
maybe 1/7th of the stuff that is coming
out of the bottle is landing on your face.
With body sunscreen, you can spray them
a bit closer. There were a couple of
Australian studies that found that even tiny
wind speeds will blow away almost all of it
if you are at any sort of distance. So it
is much better to spray into your hand and
then apply it or spray it right next
to your skin. But I don't think this
is what he's talking about because he says
"long-term" - this whole "spray sunscreen
isn't working problem" is also a short-term
problem because you are going to get burnt.
I think what he's talking about is the
whole chemical sunscreens are toxic stuff
that he talked about in his Huberman episode
which I debunked in that 2-hour video. It is
essentially the same FDA misunderstanding of
how animal and in vitro studies factor into
safety assessments that I went over earlier.
He's ignoring the concept of dose and the fact
that much more qualified people have done
the calculations to translate it to human
use. When I talked to him about this, he didn't
seem to realize safety assessments even existed.
drinksunpowder: Sunbum premium
moisturizing 3.9. It's a chemical
sunscreen. It is a little bit higher
of an SPF, but again, octocrylene.
M: How is he coming up with these numbers?
He hasn't actually mentioned octocrylene yet,
but yeah, it is the same arguments.
It's one of the ones that he went on
about being like potentially scary in his
Huberman episode. It seems like he just
hasn't looked deeper into how sunscreens
are regulated since he recorded that.
drinksunpowder: I do like that it's in
a topical format as opposed to a spray.
M: Sprays are also topical. Topical just means
on skin. I think maybe he means cream or lotion.
He did say a lot of really bizarre stuff about
skin care and hair care in his Huberman episode,
like the idea that lotions contain alcohol to
help them come out of pumps. There are lots of
lotions that do not have pumps and do not have
alcohol. That whole episode is just super weird.
drinksunpowder: Neutrogena Ultra Sheer Dry
Touch Sunscreen. I'd probably say 5.25.
M: Okay, so we are at three
significant figures now.
drinksunpowder: High SPF, which is
great, but I do like shifting over
to mineral predominant sunscreens
for a variety of reasons. Super -
M: I don't know. It just seems really
weird how he's avoiding saying what
these reasons are in this clip. like he
just jumped straight to the next product.
drinksunpowder: -goop Glow Screen
SPF 40. So I'd probably put this at
a 6.5. This is a hybrid sunscreen and
kind of makeup primer. It can worsen
uh acne breakouts and oily or
acne prone skin. So be careful.
M: I think this confirms my theory that he
doesn't actually wear sunscreen. Glow Screen
is really more of a primer than a sunscreen
because if you apply the right amount,
you look like Tin Man. This is what I look
like with the proper amount on. It's like,
not good. Also, it is not a hybrid
sunscreen. The active ingredients
are all chemical sunscreens. Titanium dioxide
is an ingredient in this, but it's there as a
pigment. It is a larger size. It doesn't really
absorb UV. It is the shimmer in the product.
drinksunpowder: Coppertone sport sunscreen
spray. Yeah. 1.9. I've never been a fan of
spray chemical sunscreens for a variety of
reasons. I don't like the propellant and
I don't like the fact that sprays often
don't provide adequate coverage at all.
M: I'm glad he's talking about the coverage,
but this whole propellant thing and his whole
variety of reasons, it just sounds like again
it is clean beauty pseudoscience. Just not
understanding that dose is important because
if you have too much of literally anything,
it will be bad for you. The propellant
is probably hydrocarbon. It is a gas is
pretty similar to natural gas that you
have in stoves. And with this stuff,
you have to really try before you can inhale
enough for it to actually be a health problem.
drinksunpowder: EltaMD UV Daily Face Sunscreen.
I'd probably put this at an 8.5. I like that
it's a mineral-based sunscreen. This has been
dermatologist tested not to clog your pores for
oily or acne prone skin. I think it's an excellent
sunscreen and we carry it in my practice.
M: I mean, I agree this is a nice sunscreen,
but it is actually a hybrid sunscreen. It
contains octinoxate and zinc oxide.
And this is good because it means the
sunscreen overall it ends up being lighter and
it has less white cast because it relies less
on having lots of zinc oxide. It gives like the
properties in between a chemical and a physical
sunscreen aesthetically. But in his Huberman
episode he says he doesn't like octinoxate.
Teo Soleymani: Some of these chemical compounds,
particularly oxybenzone, particularly octocrylene,
particularly um octinoxinate, um that can have
endocrine disruption or affect the nervous system.
M: Has he changed his mind or is he okay with it
when he's selling it? Or has he just not looked
at the products that he's selling properly
or the products he talks about in a TikTok
video that's marketing his Sun Powder? Or does he
think octinoxate is different from octinoxinate?
drinksunpowder: Neutrogena Beach Defense SPF
70. I'd probably put this at a mid-range 6
to 6 and 1/2. I don't think you need
the SPF 70. There are better options.
M: Again, this just really feels like he's
avoiding talking about what his reasoning is
for avoiding chemical sunscreens. I do agree
that SPF 70 is a bit excessive, but for me,
it's because SPF measurements aren't that precise,
especially when you go above SPF 50. Like the
acceptable range is a lot bigger than you'd
expect. I'll talk much more about this when we
do my eventual SunscreenGate/Ultra Violette/Choice
proper breakdown video. That is coming, I swear.
drinksunpowder: CeraVe hydrating mineral
sunscreen. I actually love this. I'd probably
put this at a 9 and 1/2. It has a little bit of
tint so people can use it as a replacement for
a foundation or primer. I like that it doesn't
have chemical boosters. I I like this sunscreen.
M: Okay, I am glad he's now found out about
boosters since his Huberman episode. SPF
boosters are ingredients that increase the SPF
of a sunscreen, but they aren't active sunscreen
ingredients. And a lot of these are actually
very similar to chemical sunscreens. They are
essentially chemical sunscreens with a couple
of extra atoms. But the bits that absorb the UV,
the bits that are acting as a sunscreen filter,
they are the same. The problem here though is
that this does contain an SPF booster. It is
diethylhexyl syringylidene malonate. It has a
similar structure to octinoxate,
which is a chemical sunscreen.
I think if he was a bit more knowledgeable,
I would have a whole conspiracy theory going
about how he's trying to make people feel
like chemical sunscreens aren't an option
because people are more likely to hate mineral
sunscreens and then if they don't like sunscreens,
then they'll have more of a market, more of a need
for his powder. But I think he just doesn't really
know what he's talking about still. Like I think a
skincare influencer who's just tried some of these
products on their own skin would be a much more
relevant expert for ranking products like this.
I think this also highlights how people who keep
going on about how mineral sunscreens are a great
option. They probably don't worry that much.
And if they do, I don't think they are applying
the recommended amount. Like Huberman saying the
mineral-based ones are not inferior in any way.
drinksunpowder: Okay, so I'm here in
Malibu on Mother's Day with my family
spending some time at the beach and it's
a beautiful 85° sunny day. Lots of people
outside and my family and I love to
be in the water. Love to spend time
in the sun and obviously we've taken our sun
protective measures. We put on our sunscreen.
M: Have you? Have you actually put
on a mineral sunscreen here? This is
what I look like with the right amount of
mineral sunscreen on. Can you post a video
of yourself applying this amazing no white
cast mineral sunscreen with no boosters,
please? Like I think we all want this
recommendation if you actually have one.
tylor.lee: Stop using Korean
sunscreens. If you live in Australia,
you should be using Australian
sunscreens. I feel like no one's
actually given the proper explanation
as to why. So let me explain it to you.
M: I agree this is best, especially
if you're getting a lot of sun,
but a lot of the reasons that she
gives in this video are pretty
common myths. So I thought this would
be a nice time to try to debunk them.
tylor.lee: Korean sunscreens are
Korean sunscreens designed for the
Korean sun. The ozone layer in Australia
is extremely thin. Korean sunscreens are
designed to be more skin care, which is
not thick enough for an Australian sun.
M: Kind of. First off, the reason Australia has
stronger sun isn't because of the ozone layer.
The thin part doesn't actually reach Australia.
It's actually because of the lack of pollution and
the fact that the Earth is physically closer
to the sun during our summertime. But also,
we just have a lot of white people living
in a place where white skin did not evolve.
Now, Australian sunscreens are usually
thicker than the Korean sunscreens that
are popular outside of Korea. And this
usually means that they will stay on skin
better. But this isn't actually about Korean
versus Australian sun. It is Korean versus
Australian lifestyle. We have a more active
lifestyle. It is hotter. We get sweatier.
That means that we are much much more likely
to sweat off the sunscreen. People in Korea
are much more likely to wear sunscreen
on a daily basis to and from the office.
I've talked to Australian brands who said they're
not going to make lightweight sunscreens because
they do not want people getting burnt.
Australians just don't understand that
a lightweight sunscreen that they're grabbing
from the shop next to all the other sunscreens.
This is not one for hiking or gardening or going
to the beach. Whereas the average Korean person,
they know that wearing daily sunscreen to the
office is a thing. They know that if they want
something for more sweaty activities, they need
to find a water resistant sunscreen that is for
sports. And these do exist. They just aren't
anywhere near as popular outside of Korea.
tylor.lee: The amount of clients I have
done skin consults on and we use an Observe
machine and you can see the sun damage
on their skin. I ask them first thing,
"What sunscreen do you use?" Nine times out
of 10 they've been using Korean sunscreens.
M: This is obviously anecdotal evidence, so it
isn't reliable, but there are a bunch of issues
with using Korean sunscreens in Australia. I
already mentioned people sweating them off,
but another issue, so many people are buying fakes
off websites like Amazon. This is happening a
lot with popular Korean and Japanese sunscreens.
There are all these counterfeit products online.
My sister bought a Biore one that had the
wrong smell, a different texture. It didn't
show up under UV. I've also seen people
buying Beauty of Josson, that like Sun:
Rice Probiotics sunscreen. Beautiful sunscreen,
but the stuff on Amazon was just not right.
There are also temperature excursions. It's like
your package went on a cruise ship through fire
and ice. There's usually no temperature control
when you're shipping things between different
countries. And so the sunscreen can be
exposed to temperatures that will make
them break down or separate. I don't think this
happens all that often, but at the same time,
it is hard to tell if your product has gone
through this unless it has obviously separated.
So if you're getting a lot of sun, like you're
going to the beach, you're going on a hike,
then it is just a lot safer to use a
sunscreen that you buy from a physical store,
they have temperature control until they hit
the shelf. And then you also want to make sure
you don't leave it in the car or put it in the
sun. For a lower risk situation where you're
getting a lot less UV, like autumn or winter,
you're just going to and from the office,
you're just getting a tiny bit of UV
exposure, then sunscreens that you
import from overseas are probably a lot more
fine. It is just like weighing up the risks.
tylor.lee: Another thing is
water resistance. Australian
sunscreens are designed to be water
resistance, meaning they are thicker.
M: This isn't always the case
either. There are water-resistant
Korean sunscreens and I'm sure they are
more water resistant than a lot of non
water resistant Australian sunscreens.
And again, the main issue here is just
picking a product that stays on your skin
for whatever activity you're about to do.
tylor.lee: And the UV filters in Korean
sunscreens have not been tested in Australia.
M: This isn't true. The sunscreen ingredients
in Korea are pretty much the same as the
sunscreen ingredients in Australia. There's
like maybe three that aren't the same.
tylor.lee: An SPF 50 in Korea is designed
to be an SPF 50 in Korea because their ozone
layer is a lot stronger. In Australia,
an SPF 50 from Korea is an SPF 15.
M: This isn't true. SPF is tested pretty much the
same way all around the world. The main method
used is the ISO 24444 method. There are two new
methods coming in as well, but all of these use
a standardized UV light, not the actual sun. It's
a machine that's been calibrated that should be
the same all around the world. That is the whole
point of this test, like this standardization.
There are a whole bunch of labs that do this
test. And Australian sunscreens don't have to
be tested in Australia. Korean sunscreens don't
have to be tested in Korea. They can send their
sunscreens to any lab they want. They can
send them to Korea and Australia. Like you
can even swap. So SPF 50 in theory should
be the same around the world. In reality,
it isn't because of reasons we will get to in
that Choice / SunscreenGate / Ultra Violette
episode. I don't know how long this video
has been running for. I filmed this over
2 days and it is now a quarter to 1 in the
morning. I should probably stop. Sorry, Omar.
I might do a part two later in sunscreen
misinformation season because I've been sent
so many videos. I have like a folder of maybe 50
that I could just keep going through. I hope you
enjoyed this and learned something new. Like
and subscribe if you want to see more. Also,
send me more videos to react to. Until next
time, keep your critical thinking caps on.